---
layout: page
active: lectures
title: "Lecture 21: C++ (3)"
auto-title: true
---

Outline:

- Templates
- Operator overloads


## Templates

Let's say we want to make a vector class, but we want a version that works with ints, floats, or doubles.
In C++, **templates** let you define all of the pieces of a class (or function).
Then, you can specify a type to **instantiate** that template.
Templates can be used to create a variety of classes that are not related (except that they are quite similiar),
yet share all the code in one place.


```cpp
template <typename T>
struct t_vec3
{
  T x, y, z;
};

t_vec3<float> a;
t_vec3<int> b;
t_vec3<double> c;
```

You can also make template methods and functions:

```cpp
template <typename T>
void swap(T & x, T & y)
{
  T temp = x;
  x = y;
  y = temp;
}
```

Reference: [Templates](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/templates)


## Operator Overloads

Operator overloads let us specify how operators apply to our classes.
If we write a vector class, obviously we can have this:

```cpp
vec3 a, b;
a.Add(b);
```

But what about this?

```cpp
vec3 a, b, c;
a = b + c;
```

It turns out that operators can be implemented for your classes just like a method:

```cpp
struct vec3
{
  // ...

  void operator += (const vec3 & other)
  {
    x += other.x;
    y += other.y;
  }
};
```

Note that if you are implementing an operator that can be used in expressions,
you likely want to return a temporary instance of your class:

```cpp
struct vec3
{
  // ...

  vec3 operator + (const vec3 & other)
  {
    vec3 temp;
    temp.x = x + other.x;
    temp.y = y + other.y;
    return temp;
  }
};
```

This is why we use the funny `<<` syntax for writing messages to `cout`.
That *is* the bitshift left operator, it just is just overloaded for formatted output.

Note that for some operators, you can define it *outside of the class*.
If we want to be able to do this:

```cpp
vec3 x;
cout << x << endl;
```

... we need to be able to write the operator `<<` that takes a `std::ostream` on the left and our `vec3` class on the right.
We can do so by writing this outside of our `vec3` class definition:

```cpp
ostream & operator << (ostream & stream, const vec3 & vec)
{
  return stream << vec.x << " " << vec.y << " " << vec.z;
}
```

Note how it takes an returns a reference to an `ostream`.
This shows that we can use something somewhat atypical as the return type of our operator overloads
(normally you might think that bitshift left returns an integral type).
It also shows how we can chain together long formatting expressions using this operator.

By the way, we can also write this operator overload *within* our `vec3` class using the `friend` keyword:

```cpp
  friend ostream & operator << (ostream & stream, const vec3 & vec)
  {
    return stream << vec.x << " " << vec.y << " " << vec.z;
  }
```

The `friend` keyword in this context makes a function that is *not* a member of the class (it's a standard, global function).
It also has access to all protected and private fields of the class, but in this case our `vec3` has none.

You can overload just about every operator there is, except for `.`,  `::`, and `?:`.
Note that you can, however, overload `->`.
This is what makes it possible to have "smart" pointer classes.

```cpp
template <typename T>
class SmartPointer
{
private:
  T * ptr;
  int references = 0;

public:
  T * operator ->()
  {
    return ptr;
  }

  SmartPointer()
  {
    references ++;
  }

  ~SmartPointer()
  {
    if (-- references == 0)
    {
      delete ptr;
    }
  }
};
```

You can also overload the `()` operator to make things that look like functions:

```cpp
template <int min, max>
struct random
{
  int operator()
  {
    return rand() % (max - min) + min;
  }
};

random r;
int x = r();
```

Because of the way this looks and works, it is called a **Function Object** or sometimes **functor**.
The standard library sorting functions can take classes like this to implement predicates:

```cpp
struct {
    bool operator()(const myclass & a, const myclass & b) const
    {
        return a.field < b.field;
    }
} customLess;
vector<myclass> s;
std::sort(s.begin(), s.end(), customLess);
```

But wait a minute - the post and pre increment operators are going to be impossible to tell apart!
Remember that prefix increment (`++a`) increments and returns the incremented value,
whereas postfix increment (`a++`) increments and returns the value *before* it was incremented.
How do we define both `++a` and `a++` using this syntax?
The answer is that postfix increment/decrement is given a dummy `int` argument that is not used:

```cpp
struct vec2
{
  vec2 & operator++() // prefix
  {
    x++;
    y++;
    return *this;
  }

  vec2 operator++(int) // postfix
  {
    vec temp(*this);
    operator++(); // calls the pre-increment
    return temp;
  }
};
```


Reference: [operator overloading](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/operators)


