---
layout: page
permalink: /project/part4/
title: "Program 4 - Transforms and Anti-aliasing"
---

Due Friday May 19th, 2007 at 11:55pm

---

## Goals for assignment 4:

For this portion of your ray tracer, your program needs to:

- handle all previous specifications with modifications to the way reflection and refraction are weighted by using the Schlick approximation to weight reflection and refraction
- handle geometric transforms on all geometric types
- handle multiple lights
- use anti-aliasing (9 stratified super samples per pixel) (be able to turn this on and off with command line)

Example files and results will be posted and announced on email.
You will need to create your own visually interesting scene that you render and submit the .pov file.

---

## What you should hand in via polylearn:

- Your code, include all files necessary to compile and run your ray tracer, including a Makefile or cmakeLists.txt
- A README.txt file with any information about what is working or not working with your implementation to assist the grader in determining what is causing potential errors in your output and help in assigning partial credit.
- Your own .pov file and rendered image of an interesting scene

You need to handin your code and images generated using poly learn.
Look for the assignment directory.

## Grading breakdown:

- 20 handle geometric transforms
- 15 anti-aliasing (note that anti-aliasing should be able to be turned on an off via command line see below)
- 10 Schlick for weighting reflection and refraction
- 5 multiple lights
- 10  general sanity


For anti-aliasing, please assume that we will now default to one BRDF (Blinn-Phong), thus change your command line arguments such that the 4th command line argument could be used to turn on and off anti-aliasing.
Please use 1 to enable anti-aliasing and 0 to not use anti-aliasing.
For example:

Your program should have the following syntax:

  `raytrace <width> <height> <input_filename> <anti-aliasing on or off>`

where the options are:

  - `width` = the image width
  - `height` = the image height
  - `input_filename` = the name of the povray file to read and render uses anti-alising

Thus:

  `raytrace 640 480 sample.pov 1`

will render a 640x480 image file, `sample.tga` consisting of the scene defined in `sample.pov` using the Blinn-Phong and anti-aliasing!

---

Program execution – same as before:
Your program should have the following syntax:
  `raytrace <width> <height> <input_filename> <BRDF>`

Sample input files and images are given on the class webpage.
Some of these pictures may be generated by Povray and will not look identical to your output (due to differences in the shading model, etc.).
